Add documentation for .NET 10 API endpoint authentication behavior changes (#35895)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/security/authentication/api-endpoint-auth.md

---
title: API endpoint authentication behavior in ASP.NET Core
author: wadepickett
description: Learn how ASP.NET Core 10 and later handles authentication failures for API endpoints using cookie authentication.
ai-usage: ai-assisted
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-10.0'
ms.author: wpickett
ms.date: 08/06/2025
uid: security/authentication/api-endpoint-auth
---

# API endpoint authentication behavior in ASP.NET Core

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-10.0"

> Starting with ASP.NET Core 10, the framework introduces a significant improvement in how authentication failures are handled for API endpoints when using cookie authentication. This change addresses the common issue where API endpoints would redirect unauthenticated requests to login pages, which is inappropriate for programmatic API access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using cookie authentication, API endpoints return the appropriate HTTP status codes (such as 401 or 403) for authentication failures instead of redirecting unauthenticated requests to login pages. This behavior, which is more suitable for programmatic API access, was introduced in ASP.NET Core in .NET 10.
```

ASP.NET Core automatically applies this behavior to endpoints it recognizes as API-related, including:

- Controllers decorated with the `[ApiController]` attribute
- Minimal API endpoints registered with `MapGet`, `MapPost`, `MapPut`, `MapDelete`, etc.
- Endpoints that explicitly request JSON responses
- SignalR hubs and endpoints

## Default behavior and customization

By default, ASP.NET Core applies cookie authentication logic based on the endpoint type:

- **Web pages**: Redirect to login pages
- **API endpoints**: Return 401 or 403 status codes without redirects

## Configuring the behavior

While the default behavior works for most scenarios, it can be customize if needed:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddAuthentication(CookieAuthenticationDefaults.AuthenticationScheme)
    .AddCookie(options =>
    {
        options.LoginPath = "/Account/Login";
        // The framework automatically handles API endpoints
        // No additional configuration needed
    });
```

If you need to override the automatic detection for specific endpoints, use the `[Authorize]` attribute with specific authentication schemes or implement custom authentication handlers.

## Migration considerations

> This change is designed to be non-breaking for existing applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This behavior change introduced in .NET 10 is designed to be non-breaking for existing applications:
```
